# Changing The Way We View Homelessness

The purpose of this project is to create a new way to visualize homelessness in the US. Currently, the majority of the measurements in place to gauge homelessness levels and the performance of HUD systems treat the homeless as a static population. This appraoch leads to static solutions. If there are 600K homeless people, the solution is to provide 600K beds in shelters. But the actual issue is much more dynamic, with up to 80% of the total homeless in a given year becoming homeless for the first time. Nearly half of the people leaving the shelters are leaving to unknown destinations. Around 1/4 of those that "successfully" exit the shelters to permanant housing find themselves back in the system within two years. 

Understanding these "flows" is essential to creating and measuring the effectiveness of programs to stamp out the homeless epidemic. With this dynamic framework in mind, rather than just trying to produce enough buckets to catch the flow of homelessness, we can try to reduce the source of the flow itself. This results in less people experiencing homelessness overall, as well as less people that will require long term assistance. But the key to successfull inflow reduction will be performance measurements. Governments and CoC facilities have finite budgets and need to be well informed so they can be allocating their resources with maximum effect. This will also require cross-functional and interagency cooperation. If the VA institutes a new program that teaches financial literacy or finds an effective way to address PTSD, these programs might have a measureable effect on the significant population of homeless veterans. If there is an innovative prison reform program, a breakthrough in treatment for substance abuse or mental illness, there could be significant effect in homelessness. But we will only be aware of the effects of these types of innovations, both successful and unsuccessful, if we change the way that we understand homelessness today. 

I am proposing the use of a Sankey diagram that helps to capture and quickly visualize the dynamic nature of homelessness using existing data. At a glance we can see the ratios for people entering and exiting the system. This diagram has potential to have layers of additional information added to it as well. Perhaps several yearly diagrams could be strung together to see how the flows compare year to year. Perhaps lines or scatter plots could be added to represent specific populations or target ranges. Perhaps a sankey style spending diagram could be overlaid so we can compare the level of spending to the results or level of the issue being addressed. There is plenty of room for growth and innovation here, so let's get started!

check out the interactive version [here](https://hub.gke2.mybinder.org/user/nathaniel-j-sank.py-sppogrgm/voila/render/static_sankey.ipynb?token=9RfjhefnQ9-vpNqRt4Mxdw)
